Let's start with pure functions and side effects,
what is that?
Well, a pure function is a function which for some given input,
so for some given arguments, always produces the same output, so the same arguments, the same values for
the given arguments always produce the same output
and it also does not trigger any side effects, which means it does not change anything outside of the
function.
So let's have a look at this in practice. For this again,
we get a very basic project, an empty HTML file pretty much with no content and an app.js file
which is also empty,
you can create it yourself or take the one which you find attached and in there, I want to create a pure
function without side effects with you.
And a basic example for this
and of course you can create the function in any way you want with the function keyword, as a function
expression or as a function expression with the arrow function syntax,
here I'll go through the good old function declaration syntax. So I'll create such a function and l name it add
and this will take two numbers, num1 and num2 as parameters let's say and then return num1 + num2
,
so it's a very basic function which adds two numbers. We can then console log a call to that function
with the numbers 1 and 5 for example and another one with the values 12 and 15.
Now if we do that and we execute this function simply by loading our empty HTML file, we see that we get
the results 6 and 27 and no matter how often I reload, which I'm doing here, we always get the same result
which shouldn't be a surprise because there is no randomness in this function, there is no strange behavior.
For the same values as I input, we always will get back the same result, 6 and 27 and therefore this is
a perfect example for a pure function. It does not change anything outside of the function and it always
produces the same result for the same inputs.
Now what would be an example for an impure function? For example, add random where we always get an input
and then we return num1 plus math.random, so we return our input plus a random number. If we then call
add random, let's say with a value of 5, then we of course see that if we run this code, we get different
results down there every time I reload this page, you see how this changes.
Of course we do because we add a random function but because we can't predict the output for a given
input, this would be an impure function,
so a function that is not pure. A function is also not to be considered pure if it introduces side effects
which is a fancy term for saying it changes anything outside of the function, that could be an HTTP
request which you are sending or data which is stored in the database but it could also be something more
trivial, like let's say changing some variable which is defined outside of the function. Let's say we
have our previous result variable which is 0 and then we had a function, add more numbers, where we have
num1 and num2 again
and I do still sum them up, num1 + num2
but then I also set previous result equal to sum before I return the result.
So this function here would now not be pure because it introduced a side effect, the side effect is not
that we calculate the sum here because that is stored in a constant which is part of the function,
this would be absolutely fine,
the side effect is this line here,
we change a variable that is defined outside of the function.
So when you call this function and you don't see the function definitions, if you just call it like this,
it might not be obvious that besides returning a result, this function changes something and therefore,
this might be something you want avoid.
Now I'll talk a bit more about the rules regarding when you should use pure functions and when it's
OK to use other functions in the next lecture
but for the moment, just be aware that this function would hold a so-called side effect. Another example
for a function with a side effect would be a function that changes an object or an array that you pass
into it.
Let's say we have our hobbies here and there we got an array with sports and cooking and then we have
a function, print hobbies and we expect to get our hobbies here as an argument, as a parameter,
I'll just name it h here
and of course we console log h here but let's say for whatever reason, we also push a new hobby onto
that array, new hobby. If we now call print hobbies and we pass in hobbies, we'll see that what actually
gets printed is our hobbies array with the new extra hobby here, as you can see here and the reason for
that of course is that we change that array but because arrays are objects and objects are reference
values,
when we change that array here, we change the original array because what we get here in the parameter
is not a copy of that array but a copy of the address of the array and therefore, we work with the exact
same object in memory,
so when we change it inside of the function, we also change it outside of the function,
hence again we have a side effect. So that are pure functions and side effects,
is it now a good idea to use pure function? Is it bad?
Is it bad to use side effects?
How should you work with functions with this extra knowledge gained?